# MSDN Documentation

This section contains references to relevant Microsoft documentation, as called out with the <sup>M</sup> notation.

#### CRT functions not supported with /ZW
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/apps/jj606124.aspx

#### ApplicationViewState
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/apps/windows.ui.viewmanagement.applicationviewstate.aspx

#### Guidelines for common user interactions
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/apps/hh465370.aspx

#### Legacy Graphics: OpenGL
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/desktop/dd374278.aspx

#### D3DCompileFromFile function
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/apps/hh446872.aspx

#### D3DCreateBlob function
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/desktop/ff728672.aspx

#### Memory Management Functions
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/desktop/aa366781(v=vs.85).aspx

#### Windows 8 app certification requirements
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/apps/hh694083.aspx

#### Windows.UI.Popups namespace
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/apps/windows.ui.popups.aspx

#### Windows.Storage.Pickers
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/apps/windows.storage.pickers.provider.aspx

#### Charms
http://windows.microsoft.com/en-US/windows-8/charms

#### Capability
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/apps/br211423.aspx

#### DeviceCapability
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/apps/br211430.aspx

#### Dependencies
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/apps/br211428.aspx

#### App Installation Cmdlets in Windows PowerShell
http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/hh856045.aspx

#### PLMDebug
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/hardware/jj680085.aspx

#### IApplicationActivationManager interface
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/desktop/hh706902.aspx

#### Core Connectivity
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ee480472.aspx

#### How to deploy and run a Windows Phone app
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windowsphone/develop/ff402565.aspx#BKMK_tool

#### Running Windows Store apps on a remote machine
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/vstudio/hh441469.aspx#BKMK_Install

#### Windows Remote Management
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/desktop/aa384426.aspx

#### Windows.Devices.Input namespace
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/apps/windows.devices.input.aspx

## FIXME: Uncategorized/unused
Win32 CreateCursor
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms648385.aspx

Windows Web Services API
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/desktop/dd430435.aspx

Windows.ApplicationModel.Background
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/apps/windows.applicationmodel.background.aspx

Windows.UI.Notifications
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/apps/windows.ui.notifications.aspx

Tiles, badges, and notifications
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/apps/hh779725.aspx

Sending notifications
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/apps/hh779722.aspx

Lock screen overview
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/apps/hh779720.aspx

Secondary tiles overview
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/apps/hh465372.aspx

Toast notification overview
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/apps/hh779727.aspx

Tile and toast image sizes
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/apps/hh781198.aspx

Badge overview
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/apps/hh779719.aspx

BadgeNotification
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/apps/windows.ui.notifications.badgenotification.aspx

Microsoft.SmartDevice.Connectivity Namespace
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb383909.aspx

How to deploy and run a Windows Phone app: Deploying an app at the command prompt
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windowsphone/develop/ff402565.aspx#BKMK_commandline

